Well, welcome to this month's May of 2019's edition of "Ask Your Rev. Doctor."
My name's Andrew Murray.
For those of you who have perhaps never listened to the show, they run every third Friday of
the month from 7 to 8 o'clock.
We also have a live call-in from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock where people
can call in with questions either related or unrelated to the topic of the month.
As always, it's become very appreciated and commonplace here with the "Ask Your Rev. Doctor"
show for, gosh, 10 years or more now.
We're very pleased to have Dr. Raymond Peat's expertise on the show.
He has a wealth of wisdom and a wealth of knowledge.
I don't think there's many things I've ever asked him that he hasn't got a good answer
for.
He'll be joining us, of course, and I'll be posing questions to him and getting his
view and his understanding on some of those things that we'll be bringing up in tonight's
discussion.
We can always be reached after the show, Monday through Friday, regular business hours, 1-888-WBM-ERB.
This month's subject is a little clear up from last month to get one or two of the questions
I never got a chance to ask Dr. Peat.
And then we're going to carry on with pollutants, particulates and waste creating havoc with
biological life as we know it.
Increasingly we are armed with more and more information as time goes on.
As usual, I ask people to be moderate about their information and check their sources.
Obviously there's a wealth of information on the internet and there is quite a desire
to attract your attention.
So take a look at the studies, but look at the background of the studies.
I'm always questioning Dr. Peat when he'll come up with answers for certain things and
point me to a study.
And sometimes these studies are buried and you won't find them too easily.
What you'll find is the hype, the media sensationalized responses, the cliche answers, etc. or the
repeated dogma or even downright lies that are perpetuated in the name of science.
So always check your sources and make sure that your details are coming from not vested
interests but honest research that's seeking to find the truth.
And good science will always be answerable and will always put itself in the right place
when better science comes up with a better answer.
So science is a very good thing for science's sake.
Although it's very much a holistic thrust which I go through the show with, it's definitely
grounded very much in science because it's a pretty true pathway through.
So Dr. Peat, thanks for joining us so much.
Just in case people have tuned into the show for the first time and maybe never heard your
voice, would you please just go over your academic professional background before we
get started?
I studied at the University of Oregon, biology specializing in reproductive physiology and
biochemistry as it related to that.
A PhD in 1972 and since then continuing related study.
Yeah.
Okay.
And you've spent a very large part of that time actively interacting with people and
trying to get them to change what they've been doing and what they do and kind of steering
them in a better direction given the evidence and the science that you've found out and
you've studied and you've recognized is a much better way forward than what we're normally
told.
Yeah.
Around 1960 I decided that any knowledge should be useful.
So any time I find out anything interesting I try to connect it to practical reality.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Well if we can just finish up with a couple of the things I never got a chance last month
to question you about before we launch into the pollutant side of this month's talk.
I think the figures show a 25% increase over the 38 years that the study was done from
1975 to 2012 in the prevalence of cancers in adolescents.
Now this does tie into this night's show anyway because the pollutant aspect of this evening's
topic very much encompasses all of these things which could be perfectly responsible for a
lot of these cancers that have been shown in this study to be very much on the rise
and scary reading it is too.
So I found that pathologies in adolescents are accelerating and it's not like a kind
of very slow increase.
It's a kind of a rapid acceleration that they're seeing in the numbers of adolescents
that are suffering from cancers that never were seen before.
And so what do you, I mean they have implicated obesity and I think the whole obesity linked
to diet is probably a good and reasonable detail in the equation of why adolescents
and/or cancers in general are just exploding.
What do you think about them from a biological and physiological perspective because I know
you've done a lot of work on polyunsaturates and thyroid and those kind of things that
are...
Yeah, I think some of it is the present diet and the present polluted environment full
of carcinogens and estrogens.
But I think it was actually starting a long time ago influencing prenatal conditions even
so that their parents' exposure is transmitted affecting the way they develop in the utero
and affects the whole maturing process.
So early childhood diseases have increased so much, colitis for example.
I don't think it is likely that it's all some change in the diet that is making them so
allergic, so reactive to fairly ordinary things in the environment.
For example, it's known that the polyunsaturated content of the mother's diet increases the
allergies of the babies and so colitis in young children is probably a reaction to the
mother's diet, maybe from earlier exposures of the parents.
Right.
Okay, so this would be like an inflammatory process occurring within the bowel and you
always kind of use the bowel as the seat of health in terms of a good bowel pretty much
will predispose you to good health and if there are changes that you need to make, your
bowel will be the first place to look at.
So in terms of this kind of reactive allergic type condition, you've also mentioned, and
I wanted to ask you this a little while back actually, why?
And I think just to get it on tape as it were, you know, tape is obsolete these days, but
just to get it on audio for people to hear in future, the whole rationale behind mothers
being prescribed fish oils, omega oils, and telling them that that is actually good for
their child's health, and I know you've rebut this or rebutted it with studies showing that
the child whilst maybe appearing more sedate and calm and relaxed when they're first birth
is actually a sign of the kind of retardation in some ways and that actually there's a relationship
between lower brain weight and function and intelligence associated with the same oils
that you've mentioned here in terms of the mother's diet and the way that's changed in
the last 30 or 40 years.
Yeah, last month I think I mentioned the French study that thought they were going to demonstrate
improved prenatal brain function by giving these extremely unsaturated fats to the mother
during pregnancy, and they showed just the opposite, that retarded development and retarded
learning, but in the early 1970s they were already seeing that the polyunsaturated fats
during pregnancy made animals develop smaller brains that learned more poorly.
Yeah, alright.
I think I wanted to go on with some of the cancers that were stated to be on the rise
according to etiology and see if there's any link between the type of cancer and the environmental
effects, perhaps, of some of these chemicals in the environment with those particular organs.
I know the figures talk about non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and then thyroid cancer is the second
one here, and then myeloid leukemia and testicular cancer.
And now these are things, I mean I'm looking at germ cell type cancers with testicular
cancer and then in the myeloid cancers this is kind of, again, another, it's not germ
cell in the terms of sex germ cells, but it's a kind of progenitor's type situation where
the very fundamental cell that is being formed is subjected to this condition that it can't
cope with and cancer arises as a result of disorganization.
And again with the lymphomas.
What they have in common is rapid growth.
The sperm is turning over constantly and the blood cells are in constant diffusion.
And irritants accelerate the growth and the polyunsaturated fats, for example, break down
the fish oil.
It is always oxidized by the time it gets into the bloodstream.
Very little of it reaches the tissues in its entire form.
So you get these oxidized fragments that are toxic through rapidly multiplying cells causing
a deformity, atrophy in the sperm forming tissue and derangement of the development course of
the blood cells leading to leukemia and lymphoma.
How long do you think it takes from exposure to, I mean, I'm sure it depends on how healthy
a subject is to begin with, how much metabolic energy they are capable of producing, how
poorly they are functioning will also be detrimental to them.
They'll probably go down quicker as it were.
But how long do you think these things might take before they start manifesting?
In these rapidly multiplying tissues, I think it's much faster than in the average cancer.
I think that's why leukemia has been seen so often in children just a few years old
where the typical cancer, a brain cancer or a pancreas cancer, for example, usually takes
20 years or more from the carcinogenic primary exposure to the appearance of the fully developed
tumor, sometimes 40 years.
But you can definitely show that there's a cause connection to it, but it's long delayed.
And that has been useful to the polluting industries to claim that you can't show the
cause and effect relationship.
But animal studies make it clear that although there is a delay, it's an absolutely causal
process.
Do you think that younger people inherently have more resistance though to these kind
of insults or do you think actually they're more susceptible?
In some of those tissues, they're probably more susceptible because of their extreme
speed of turning over.
A little deviation in the regulatory process can send them wildly off course.
But generally the extremely high metabolic rate and quick cell division lets young organisms
bypass, they can find a way around the toxic problem and overcome it.
Okay.
All right, you're listening to Ask Urobiotic K. Medegarbovil, 91.1 FM.
From now until the end of the show, 8 o'clock, you are invited.
Well, no, from 7.30 to 8 o'clock, you're invited to call in.
The show does stop at 8 o'clock, but if people would like to call in with any questions,
the number is 707-923-3911.
So Dr. Peat, I mentioned to you in talking last month about what hasn't actually surfaced
again as another sensational headline unlike Ebola, which certainly seems to be grabbing
the headlines along with the measles "epidemic".
But what did you have to say about Candida auris?
I don't think you were that impressed with some of the sensational headlines claiming
it to be this superbug that's going to just become the be-all end-all of...
The advertising I've seen connected with it strongly suggests that it's an advertising
campaign for new drugs.
Okay, there you go.
All right.
So my last question related to antibiotics and when I was studying herbal medicine in
1990 here, they were all talking about, you know, antibiotic resistance and superbugs
and not having antibiotics to treat infections and we're all going to be in big trouble.
And yeah, I think to one extent or another, that's probably happening.
But what do you think in terms of the arsenal of antibiotics that we have to treat infections?
In Eastern Europe and Asia, long before penicillin was discovered, people were finding that there
are bacteria-killing viruses, the bacteriophage, and that technology has really developed to
a high degree that it's of no interest to the countries that have a highly developed
pharmaceutical industry.
But these viruses infect only bacteria, kill certain species.
Bacteria never develop resistance to them and the viruses are perfectly harmless to
mammals and people.
All right.
So you think as far as you're concerned, there's enough phage research being done to produce
phage is pretty much tailored for whatever organism it is that they are looking to eradicate
or deal or treat that may have become resistant to antibiotics.
You think that they are?
Yeah.
Some people have told their stories of being diagnosed as incurably infected with superbacteria
going to Eastern Europe, getting totally cured quickly.
Interesting.
All right.
And again, I don't know if it's the Russians or some other Eastern...
Yeah, Southeast, Bulgaria and Romania, I think, have a good tradition.
India too.
Wow.
Yeah, I know the Indians are pretty smart people.
I've got a lot of respect for them.
I think it's an underrated country, a lot of poor people, but some very brilliant people
have come from there.
Okay.
So I wanted to talk about a subject that we did touch on a little bit last month, but
I don't think we've really got into it at all, particulates and whether these particulates
are from diesel engines.
It's been certainly mentioned in England a long time ago that the emissions from diesel
engines were so fine that they posed a respiratory problem and something had to be done to make
the engines more efficient or therefore the scrubbers and exhaust more efficient at pulling
these things out.
But I read an article saying that pollution and air pollution in particular, although
we talk about other pollution later on, but air pollution is essentially causing damage
to every organ in the body.
This was a big article ran through from basically from the brain saying that this particular
types of air pollution can be carried and transmitted up the olfactory nerve and into
the brain.
Then I talked about thyroid and the lungs and in a reproductive organ saying that basically
nothing was spared and that dementia and heart and lung disease were becoming increasingly
prevalent and they're putting it down to air pollution and just saying that it's becoming
a crisis that needs to be addressed.
Just a few months ago, the accepted number of deaths caused by air pollution was about
4 million per year, but this recent World Health Organization study says it's over 8
million, I think 8.8 million dying from air pollution.
I mean, certainly in developing countries, Asia I think in particular, you see pictures
of the smog in China or in other capitals of the Asian world and it looks absolutely
dreadful.
It reminds me of what would have been smog in the early 1900s in England.
And obviously things like coal-fired power plants are on the increase in terms of generating
energy to keep the economies going.
What do you think about what we're faced with?
And I've always wondered about the Redwood Coast here.
Supposedly California's got a really clean, I would imagine, I'd like to see the data,
real data for it, but after coming across thousands of miles of ocean, I would have
imagined that the air would have been relatively clean compared to if we were on the East Coast
and we're getting air from the West Coast and it's blowing across the whole of the States,
picking up and carrying with it.
We do get some smoke and dust from Chinese industry, but the West Coast is far cleaner
than interior.
Coming across the ocean, it does rain out or settle out lots of material.
Okay, so from a respiratory point of view, before we get into any particular pollution,
I've certainly, when I first came here in 2001, I never really thought too much about
it, but it's kind of stayed with me for a while.
What they call here the Humboldt hack, and there was actually a noblest who was making
a product that was called Humboldt Hack-A-Way, and it was pretty popular, I think, because
there was so many people here in this area that had this persistent chronic clearing
of the throat.
And I didn't think too much of it, but everywhere around me, I would hear people coughing and
hacking, and lo and behold, probably four or five years ago, I started doing it myself,
and I'll tell you, I don't know whether or not it's a redwood allergy or if it's an allergy
to some endemic species that lives in this area or mold.
People want to talk about the mold because of the fairly dense canopy of the forest here
and how damp it is most of the winter, at least until the dryness of the summer comes.
But what do you think about that kind of respiratory allergy or a chronic infection even?
I wonder that would be responsible for such a persistent cough.
It reminds me of something that doesn't probably end in a good way.
The foliage, big forests do emit quite a lot of organic material, including pollen, and
probably is a cause of a lot of allergy.
I know there's a region in Texas famous for its cedar tree allergies.
I imagine conifer forests have people who are sensitive to their pollen.
Yeah.
Have you heard anything like that in Oregon?
No, I haven't, surprisingly.
And when I've gone away, whenever I've gone back to England, it does generally clear up
in the couple of three weeks that I have to go.
It certainly makes a difference.
And I'm like, wow, what is it that sensitized me to where I live?
And I think there is something real about it.
Anyway, OK, so getting on to plastics.
I know that's another big topic.
And I saw it probably the first time about eight months ago, I think, or maybe a year
ago.
And I'd never really considered it before.
I think we all recognize just how ubiquitous plastic is and has been for quite some time
now with the petrochemical companies producing it.
And the sea, the gyre, the one of five gyres in the world, the North Pacific gyre becoming
this floating island of debris, bigger than Mexico.
It's probably half the size of the continent of the US.
And a dive was done down to the Marianas Trench, which hadn't been exceeded since the first
dive in 1960.
Someone went down, oh, just a year ago, I think.
And lo and behold, they found down the very bottom of the Mariana Trench what appeared
to be plastic debris.
And so this sparked a whole investigation into what's going on with plastics when they
get into the environment.
And the breakdown of the fragmentation or defragmentation here of plastics into microplastics
and how just about every animal species is becoming loaded with these microplastics.
I was wondering from an estrogenic perspective that these have got to be disrupting the endocrine
system and being responsible for some part of the cancer makeup.
Yeah, plastics are in general very hydrophobic.
And so the things like the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons that are famous carcinogens,
these concentrate on the surface of the particles.
And so even the particles that are macroscopic, when they're ingested, they deliver a very
big dose, concentrated dose of these organic carcinogens that are bound to the surfaces.
But then there's the smaller particle is toxic in a directly structural way.
The extremely small nanoparticles pass right into the -- through the cells in the circulatory
system and are taken up by cells all through the body.
And if you think of the scale, you know, they're extremely small compared to bacteria.
Compared to proteins inside the cells, they're relatively huge.
They're very foreign to the structure of the cytoplasm.
And so they're necessarily disruptive when they get in cells.
And that to the degree that their size interferes with the functions of the cytoplasm, they
turn on alarm reactions of different kinds.
One kind of reaction is to make the cell leaky, giving up proteins like when the liver is
irritated, it leaks its proteins and enzymes into the bloodstream.
But ATP itself leaks out when cells are structurally irritated by these particles.
And then the ATP is recognized as a danger signal by the environment.
And so it tends to be a self-perpetuating reaction.
Cell gets irritated, sends out ATP, which alarms other cells.
They leak ATP and you get a storm of cells losing their energy and creating excitement
in their environment.
Okay, even to ATP, huh?
Yeah.
Wow.
All right.
I looked at the bisphenol A and the other, what they call the persistent organic pollutants
that were banned in the '70s, just because they recognized after they'd polluted everything
massively that these things were so persistent in the environment that they needed to do
something about it because not only would they just not break down and be persistent
for a long time, they were taken up by the fat tissue of any animal that would consume
it, and so pass up the food chain and ride up to us, obviously, as we talk about the
oceans being contaminated with plastics and microplastics, the fish that we eat and the
shellfish that we eat.
And I wanted to ask you about the shellfish.
I know you're a big advocate of shellfish for micronutrients and things that you won't
typically get from terrestrial organisms, but I looked at an article talking about mussels
in England and the people that would collect mussels and harvest them, and I think in Ireland
also on the West Coast, it's a relatively good source of food that people can gather
easily.
But these little crustaceans here, they can pick up the same microplastics as well as
these other compounds, and I wonder at what point does the negative effect of any of that
outweigh the beneficial effect of anything that's obtained from them rather than terrestrial
creatures?
Because I've always, I guess I've always steered clear of fish for the last 15 years or so
since I started finding out just how much pollution there was in the ocean in terms
of heavy metals and other compounds.
Like the organic compounds, the plastic particles tend to be concentrated up the food chain
since they aren't well detoxified.
Bigger older organisms are the ones that are most polluted and dangerous.
So years ago we stopped eating the large fish.
Orange ruffe and halibut, for example, live a very long time and accumulate huge amounts
of toxins.
Yeah, for sure.
I did a similar thing about two years ago once it started becoming just more and more
relevant.
I think for the longest time I wanted to go fishing and was, I don't know, it has never
really happened.
And I think as time went on it just became more probably relevant that I shouldn't go
fishing because actually the fish wasn't that good.
And so in the end I ran five, I think, different types of fish that were caught here locally
on the West Coast just out in Shelter Cove where we live.
And I sent it to a lab in Washington that we run our herb material through ICP-MS, which
is an induction coupled mass spectrometry, and picking out specifically the California
Prop 65 compounds that we need to closely watch and be in compliance with in terms of
production of our medicinal herbs.
So arsenic, cadmium, lead, mercury were the things that we were looking at in our herbs
and I sent fish samples to the laboratory up in Washington to sample and I was staggered
actually at what came back.
And there was definitely a correlation between the larger fish, so between tuna, salmon,
cod and bottom fish.
They were in descending order loaded with mercury.
I wasn't able to speciate the mercury to see whether it was methylmercury or some other
compound but they had the same thing with cadmium too in arsenic and way higher than
any animal product that I sent to the same lab in terms of wild game that was hunted,
whether it was elk or deer locally.
That was very clean comparatively.
So it's always put me off eating fish even though it comes from California and California
is supposedly really clean and we'd like to believe that our air is clean and the water's
clean and we live actually in a very special place.
It's so unfortunate that there is a worldwide polluted ocean.
I don't think there's any real escape from it, is there?
No, that information is part of why I'm an advocate of milk because you start with moderately
polluted vegetation, a cow eats it and sends it to the rumen where bacteria and fungus,
various microorganisms break it down and process it, eliminate many of the toxic materials
on the microbial level.
Then it's filtered into the animal's bloodstream and filtered again into the mammary gland
for levels of extremely efficient filtering.
So milk is probably the safest food by a wide margin.
All right, let me just ask the engineer, I guess I'd like to go on that but I still hear
you and I still see him so I think we're all good even though the lights are going out.
I've seen the lights flashing there in the studio so I don't know if we have any callers
on there or not.
Oh, the lights are coming back on.
We had a caller who was asking the doctor to speak to the ingredient in Roundup, the
glycosylate, the glyphosate.
That's correct.
Well, let me just let people know, you're listening to Ask Your Obed Doctor, K.M.D.
Probable, 91.1 FM, from now to 8 o'clock, callers are invited to call in with any questions
either related to plastics pollution, environmental pollution, cancer, etc., etc., caused by pollution
and the rise in it and how to mitigate that.
I'll be asking Dr. Peat in a bit here some of the strategies that can be probably best
employed.
And also, it doesn't really matter if the question is unrelated to this month's show
but the number is 707-923-3911.
So Dr. Peat, I think that person who hung up was asking about glyphosate and I saw that
there had been massive punitive damages awarded recently for that product by people that have
gotten cancer, unfortunately.
30 or 40 years ago, I knew people who had studied biology at the Oregon State University,
a land grant university which specializes in agriculture and really their education
is highly guided by industry, by the pesticide and herbicide industry.
They were telling me that Roundup is specifically toxic to plants so it can't hurt animals.
They simply were taught that there are some kind of biological ultimate distinctions between
plant cells and animal cells but really we have so much in common that it's not at all
surprising that Roundup is extremely toxic to animals too.
It's funny, I just got a little one line here that I saw in an article that in Germany,
they say that the young men there have been found to produce only a third of the sperm
that German men did 30 years ago.
What do you think about virility and spermatogenesis amongst men and that probably ties into pollution
and just decreased energy?
Yeah, everything, many things are called phytoestrogens and pseudoestrogens and so on but anything
injurious creates inflammation and the inflammation leads to the production of estrogen and so
anything that is toxic is going to reduce a man's testosterone, sperm production and
in general virility.
So let me ask you about phytoestrogens just for the record here because when I was studying
herbal medicine, back then I was under the misguided belief that phytoestrogens were
good for females with menopausal hot flashes and that they were beneficial and then I think
you just said no.
So what are your thoughts on your take on phytoestrogens and how they interact in the
body so women that maybe might have been using black cohosh or wild yam or other phytoestrogenic
herbs are actually not doing what they should be doing because we all recognize now that
progesterone is really what you need.
Some of the herbs are anti-prolactin rather than specifically anti-estrogen.
Right, that would be Vitex perhaps.
So that can be very protective and the official concept of what's estrogenic is what sticks
to the so-called estrogen receptor but the estrogen receptor, even in the total absence
of estrogen, if you injure the cell or cut off the oxygen supply, the estrogen receptor
goes through its actions of acting like estrogen is present so that it's somewhat of a coincidence
that a substance binds to the estrogen receptor.
It doesn't mean that it's going to activate estrogen-like processes.
It can inactivate the estrogen system depending on what it does to that protein.
So the estrogenic substances really, a lot of them have been called phytoestrogens but
what they're doing is either decreasing or intensifying the cell's energy production.
Estrogen characteristically acts like the loss of oxygen and so if you have something
that in effect suffocates the cell, that's estrogenic.
If you have a so-called phytoestrogen, it might stick to the estrogen receptor but if
it is an oxidant and activates, catalyzes the oxidative processes, then it's acting as an
anti-estrogen.
Okay, let's hold it there, Dr. Peat.
There's a couple of callers online that have been busy flashing away in the studio.
So let's see this first caller.
First caller, you're on the air.
Where are you from and what's your question?
Okay, I have a question.
We have not vaccinated our six-year-old and being in California now, it looks like we're
going to have to even with the doctors exempt to be in school and I'm just curious if there's
any kind of like herbal or any, like if we do decide to do something with the baby, is
there any kind of like herbal or any kind of like any kind of like any kind of like
I'm curious if there's any kind of like herbal or any like if we do decide to vaccinate,
I'm just curious if there's things you can do on the herbal medicine realm or boosting
immune system or anything like that.
Right, okay.
All right, well, it's definitely a controversial subject and one for which we're called anti-vaxxers
because we have two children and they're both in the same situation.
We never did vaccinate and we don't intend to vaccinate and they're beautiful, healthy
young children and hopefully they'll stay that way.
I think we've done shows in the past on vaccines and I know Dr. Peat will speak to it.
Having had some personal interactions with vaccine, stroke damage and mitigating the
effects of the condition.
Dr. Peat, first, how do you feel about anti-vaxxers?
Oh, I think many of them are far better informed than the doctors who ran against.
Suzanne Humphreys, for example, I think she was a kidney specialist who noticed that when
your patients were vaccinated at admission, they got worse than the patients who weren't
vaccinated and she asked the hospital to stop vaccinating her patients and had a fight with
the hospital officials and decided to specialize studying what happens with vaccinations for
several years.
So she's really well informed on it.
And the doctors I see ranting about the anti-vaxxers are generally either totally ignorant and
incompetent or they're lying.
It's just a very simple question that there have been national waves like an epidemic
of narcolepsy in Finland and another country following a big wave of vaccinations.
It's well established that the aluminum hydroxide, which is in more than 100 vaccines, is one
of the systemically toxic pro-inflammatory particles.
It's added to the vaccine simply because it arouses a generalized systemic inflammation
that makes the body react more intensely to whatever antigen related disease might be
present.
And that same generalized unfocused inflammatory reaction caused by the particles is exactly
what turns on autoimmunity and other degenerative processes.
Okay.
I mean, it's not a short answer to your question, Cora.
In terms of, okay, so you asked what could be done early.
I think as appropriate as that is your nutrition.
Dr. Peat is a big advocate of getting very good whole nutrition.
So your diet is very important and obviously things that lower your metabolic energy like
the polyunsaturates to be avoided.
You certainly want to be looking at keeping your bowel clean.
So you want to be avoiding bread, gluten, etc., those kinds of sources.
But from an energy point of view, things that support your thyroid, and I'm not just saying
this is going to protect you against smallpox, you know, if smallpox starts suddenly reappearing.
But basically, I think the metabolic energy of our people has gotten to a point where
we're on the edge of being sick.
And so I think the vitality of our civilization has definitely decreased with all the environmental
toxins or pollutants, the rubbish in the food chain and the kind of lifestyles that we've
engendered by not working like we used to.
I think it all promotes a weaker organism.
So urbanly in that regard, there are certainly things that you can do that would be supportive
of biological energy production.
I was going to ask Dr. Peat a question about the liver in terms of being responsible for
metabolizing waste.
But I know there's another couple of callers on the line here.
So I want to make sure we get time for them and they can ask Dr. Peat the questions on
that.
But in terms of being an anti-vacciner, I think one of the most important takeaways
from the vaccination thing is it's not per se anti-vaccines.
There are definitely vaccines at work.
There's no doubt about it.
But I think what it is, it's just the prevalence and the increasing numbers given simultaneously
which have really caused the problems.
And I think it's becoming a machine and very much a profit-driven machine which is actually
causing the problems, not the altruistic desire from humanitarian doctors to save children
from disease.
I don't think anybody wants to avoid that for one second.
So it's a kind of hot topic and I think I'd probably better leave it there for right now
because we do have a couple of other callers on the line.
So next caller, can we get where you're from and what's your question?
Well, one of the callers asked me to ask the doctor how he feels about flax versus fish
oil.
Probably not much better.
It's probably not quite as bad.
Dr. Peat, flax oil versus?
Much better in some ways.
But it is slightly more stable than fish oil.
The fish oil luckily is very quickly degraded.
The flax is a little more persistent and so it can be more toxic in the long run.
The other question we had was whether the doctor would recommend bentonite for clay
for flushing toxins.
You know, the clay is slightly soluble in stomach acid and releases at least a little
aluminum and other toxins and the particles, being very fine particles, are susceptible
to persorption when, especially if your intestine is irritated, the contraction can force these
particles right into the bloodstream and the particle size can be as much as ten times
the diameter of a red blood cell and so particles getting into the circulatory system can cause
considerable microscopic damage.
Okay, thanks for that.
There is another caller on the air.
So let me just let people know that from now until the end of the show at 8 o'clock, you're
invited to call in with questions either related or unrelated to this month's subject of pollution,
environmental pollution, etc.
Number 707-923-3911.
Okay, so let's take this next caller.
Caller, where are you from and what's your question?
Would that be me?
Yes, that would be you.
What's your question and where are you from?
Oh, nice.
I'm in Phillipsville and I want to thank Dr. Peat for coming on and thank you for bringing
this wisdom to us.
My question is about there's new research about highly sensitive personalities and excess
cortisol in the bloodstream and I'm wondering what Dr. Peat thinks about people who live
with, you know, gushers of cortisol day to day.
And yeah, thank you and I'll take that off the air.
Okay.
Dr. Peat, high cortisol exposure, what do you think is the outcome?
There are lots of things you can do starting with oxidative metabolism, doing things that
preserve your thyroid function and when your thyroid is functioning efficiently, you can
turn your cholesterol fairly massively into pregnenolone, progesterone and DHEA, which
are the main opponents of cortisol.
Cortisol stops inflammation but it activates a lot of degenerative breakdown processes
when it isn't backed up by large amounts of these three anti-inflammatory stabilizing
steroids.
And so thyroid and good nutrition, adequate protein, vitamin A, vitamin D, all of the
nutrients help you do the conversion to DHEA, progesterone and pregnenolone to block and
neutralize and reverse the effects of the cortisol.
Okay.
All right, Dr. Peat, I wanted to ask you personally what you think about a strategy
to improve the liver's function to metabolize waste.
Do you think that's, I mean, from a herbal perspective, it's a no-brainer because, you
know, they would talk about hepatorestoratives, liver supportive herbs, you know, that you
can find studies just everywhere showing that either milk thistle is very helpful for the
liver or schizandra or any number of bitters or other compounds that are shown to have
either antioxidant or hepatoprotective effects.
But what do you think of the rationale of improving the liver's function, I mean, to
metabolize waste and to clear it more efficiently from circulation?
Do you think that's relevant?
Oh, yeah.
And all of the tissues apparently have taste receptors, especially for bitter.
And so the bitters are acting on these particular receptors to have a calming, stabilizing effect
all through the body.
But the whole energy and protein synthesizing system is involved in detoxifying it.
It uses glucose or fructose, turning it into both vitamin C in most animals, but in humans
only to glucuronic acid, which is then attached to toxins for excretion.
And if you're well nourished, have the B vitamins, adequate carbohydrate and protein, then your
liver is pretty efficient.
It can catch toxic substances, especially hydrophobic materials.
It has proteins that can catch massive amounts of these things out of the circulation, holding
them for as much as 24 hours while the enzymes degrade it, either break it down into other
substances or attach glucuronic acid or sulfate to make it water soluble for excretion.
And polyunsaturated fatty acids can be processed and excreted in the same way to prevent the
damage that oxidizing them does.
All right.
Now, you mentioned bitters and I just wanted to pick on that quickly because we have another
caller here.
So these would be the kind of things that we would traditionally use in the herbal world
for increasing stomach acid, for pepsin production, to increase digestion and assimilation.
And reduce inflammation.
Yeah, you're saying, OK, to reduce it, bitters to reduce inflammation.
So tell me how you link those two.
There is a protein, the same that we have in our tongues, the stomach and liver tissue,
various lungs, the whole respiratory system can detect the bitter substance.
And in doing so, it activates an anti-inflammatory process.
Interesting.
All right.
Let's get this next caller on the air.
Caller, where are you from?
What's your question?
I'm Mike from Connecticut.
And I have a question following up on that point.
Go ahead.
I wanted to have Dr. Peat's view on the use of supplemental digestive enzymes like lipase,
protease, or peptase to help break down the food and help absorb the nutrients before
it gets to the gut, to the bacteria that prevent from feeding them.
Is that of any use?
OK.
Are you suffering with any malabsorption or that kind of thing that's got you interested
in digestive enzymes?
I have a weak digestion, so I usually have troubles in the upper stomach.
And usually warm, hot foods help.
Cold foods are a little harsher on my system.
OK.
Dr. Peat, I know you're a little skeptical on a wide range of supplements.
But how about digestive enzymes in terms of if there are any good digestive enzymes manufactured
out there that are, I mean, obviously...
The traditional thing was basically dehydrated animal pancreas tissue.
And those are so similar to our own enzymes that they really do work.
But you have to be cautious that because they're simply dehydrated, they are a potential source
of infection.
But I'm skeptical about the enzymes derived from fungus because in the same way you can't
absolutely purify them.
And so they're going to drag along some of the fungal antigens.
And you have to watch out for allergic reactions because if you're sensitive to the fungus
antigens, you might react to their enzymes.
OK.
I know that we used to produce a product called...
Well, actually we had two.
We had digestive bitters, which was an herb extract from about nine different herbs.
And this is for the corner.
That were based on the Swedish bitters.
And then, so they were mainly the bitters that we mentioned, Dr. Peat mentioned, that
would stimulate stomach acid production, pepsin, lipase, you know, it get the stomach moving
and other things to break down fats, etc., etc.
And I've got some very good feedback when we were producing this product.
So I think herbally, it's always the rationale there to use bitters, using the taste receptors
as a physiological trigger to increase motility and production of enzymes.
And these would certainly be beneficial.
I find people, when I consult with them, have widely differing results with digestive enzymes.
But I do find a lot of the bitter herbs in the armament of herbal medicine actually very
effective for poor digestion or fat malabsorption, etc.
Great.
I'll look into it.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you for your call.
Okay.
So, Dr. Peat, I had a couple, let's do a quick question.
I wanted to know, okay, probably too big for the last couple of minutes we have.
But just looking at the political will of the governments to do the right thing in terms
of, I saw that a figure that coal-fired power plants are actually on a decline, surprisingly,
although I know the current administration had vowed to increase them from the previous
administration's will to reduce them.
But that the developing countries like China and Asia and India especially are starting
to produce lots of power stations to get their economies going because that's just the way
it's been done traditionally.
What do you think about the political will to make the world a cleaner place?
If you can answer that in one minute or so, that would be great.
I can mention a book that is very important on that issue called The Politics of Cancer
by Samuel Epstein, written in 1978 with publication date.
And he shows that the knowledge of how to prevent most cancer has been around for almost
a hundred years, but the corporations that pollute run the government agencies.
And the agencies that you would think should be protecting the public, American Cancer
Society, National Cancer Institute, many research organizations and universities are funded
so generously by the polluting industries that they are working against the public,
even though the public pays them, pays the government and these foundations supposedly
for their protection, actually, that they're simply perpetuating the polluting.
Depressing.
Well, let's, on that note, let's let everyone be reminded, The Politics of Cancer, if I've
got that right, by Samuel Epstein, could be well worth looking at on the internet.
Maybe get a copy of it and read it.
Probably really educate yourself about what Dr. Peat's just mentioned about the mechanism
of it all.
Thank you so much for your time, Dr. Peat.
Okay, thank you.
Okay, so for those people that have listened to the show and want to find out more about
Dr. Peat's papers, his research, his written works, etc., www.rayPeat.com.
And for people who want to find out more about myself and our business, it's Western Botanical
Medicine.
I want to make people aware that there's going to be an Instagram page launched here, hopefully
within the next six weeks to two months at the most, about Dr. Peat's work and put it
in audio clips that we have produced since 2007 so that it's actually the words he's
saying because I find a lot of misconstrued information on other, supposedly, Dr. Peat
advocating sites.
So I want to set the record straight and that will be on an Instagram page called Western
Botanical Medicine, I think, at this point.
And thanks so much for listening.
Until the third Friday of next month, good night.